# slp-cpx-refl-gp

This repository contains all the programs used in the paper
*'The strong Lefschetz property for coinvariant rings of finite complex reflection groups'*
by Akihito Wachi
(in preparation on 4 Feb 2024).

In the paper we prove the strong Lefschetz property for the
coinvariant rings of irreducible finite complex reflection groups
except one type (G34) in Shephard-Todd's classification [ST].


## The Strong Lefschetz Property for Coinvariant Rings of Complex Reflection Groups 

When a finite complex reflection group acts on the polynomial ring *R*
in *n* variables over the complex number field
via the reflection representation,
the invariant subring is generated 
by *n* algebraically independent homogeneous polynomials,
which are called **fundamental invariants**,
say *f<sub>1*, ..., *f<sub>n*.

The quotient ring *R / (f<sub>1*, ..., *f<sub>n)* is called
the **coinvariant ring**.

The **strong Lefschetz property**
(see [LNM] for definition) of these coinvariant rings
are already proved for some of irreducible complex reflection groups,
and there are nine remaining types.

Once we obtain the fundamental invariants explicitly,
we can make computer programs to check the strong Lefschetz property,
and we prove the strong Lefschetz property for 
eight types out of nine remaining types
using programs in this repository.

The eight types are 
G24--G27 (rank 3),
G29, G31, G32 (rank 4)
and
G33 (rank 5)
in Shephard-Todd's classification [ST].

We have no proof for the remaining one case G34 (rank 6),
but it is natural to conjecture it has the strong Lefschetz property.

## Time Required
 
The programs were executed on MacBook Air M1 2020 with 8GB memory.
I set up "Debian GNU/Linux 11 (bullseye)" for arm64 on a virtual machine,
assigned 6GB memory,
and installed Macaulay2 using the Synaptic package manager.

The programs takes the following time to return the results.
If *mod* is written, the time is by programs over a finite field.
For example,
G29 takes about 4.5min over the rational number field,
and takes 2sec over a finite field of characteristic 43.

| Group | over *Q* | over *Z/pZ*     |
|-------|----------|-----------------|
| G24   | 1sec     | 1sec   (mod 23) |
| G25   | 1sec     | 1sec   (mod 29) |
| G26   | 1sec     | 1sec   (mod 41) |
| G27   | 1sec     | 1sec   (mod 47) |
| G29   | 4.5min   | 2sec   (mod 43) |
| G31   |          | 1.5min (mod 61) |
| G32   |          | 45min  (mod 83) |
| G33   |          | 36min  (mod 73) |

## Description of Files

The files in this repository are as follows.
Most programs are Macaulay2 codes.

### Check the Strong Lefschetz Property 

```
G??.m2 (?? = 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 33)
usage: $ M2 G24.m2 # for example
```

checks the strong Lefschetz property for the coinvariant ring of
complex reflection group of G??.

```
G??-modp.m2 (?? = 24, 25, 26, 29, 31, 32, 33)
usage: $ M2 G24-modp.m2 # for example
```

checks the strong Lefschetz property for the coinvariant ring of
complex reflection group of G?? by using a finite field.


```
check-all.sh
usage: $ bash check-all.sh
```

invokes the scripts 
`G??.m2` or `G??-modp.m2` for large groups
to check the strong Lefschetz property for all eight types.

```
slp-lib.m2
```

contains functions used in `G??.m2` and `G??-modp.m2`.  These
functions check the strong Lefschetz property for graded Artinian
rings.

### Define Invariants

```
def-??.m2 (?? = 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 33)
```

defines fundamental invariants of the complex reflection group of G??.
These files are generated by GAP3 program,

```
generate-invariants.gap3
usage: $ cat generate-invariants.gap3 | gap -q

```

which needs 
[`gap3-jm`](https://webusers.imj-prg.fr/~jean.michel/gap3/)
and generates the above eight files.

Note that `generate-invariants.gap3` calls a perl one-liner
in order to formatting the GAP output.

## Remarks on Invariants
Most fundamental invariants used in this repository 
are defined in the references cited in [ST].
In addition, [OT, Appendix B] contains 
definitions or references for the fundamental invariants,
and [BM] also lists some of them.

Note that G33 needs the corrections by [O].

In the following table
we note how the output of GAP3 corresponds
to the fundamental invariants above.

|  Group  |  Fundamental&nbsp;invariants  |  Reference  |  GAP3 (up to scaling)  |
|  ---    |  ---                    |  ---        |  ---  |
|  G24    | *f<sub>4</sub>*, *f<sub>6</sub>*, *f<sub>14</sub>* | [BM, p. 264], [MBD, p. 254],[S, p. 100] | see below |
|  G25    | *f<sub>6</sub>*, *f<sub>9</sub>*, *f<sub>12</sub>* | [M1889, p. 326], [MBD, p. 253], [S, p. 103] | *f<sub>6</sub>*, *f<sub>9</sub>*, *f<sub>12</sub> - f<sub>6</sub><sup>2</sup>* |
|  G26    | *f<sub>6</sub>*, *f<sub>12</sub>*, *f<sub>18</sub>* | [ST, pp. 286-287] | *f<sub>6</sub>*, *f<sub>12</sub> - f<sub>6</sub><sup>2</sup>*, *f<sub>18</sub> + f<sub>6</sub><sup>3</sup> - 3f<sub>6</sub>f<sub>12</sub>* |
|  G27    | *f<sub>6</sub>*, *f<sub>12</sub>*, *f<sub>30</sub>* | [BM, p. 265] [MBD, p. 254] | see below |
|  G29    | *f<sub>4</sub>*, *f<sub>8</sub>*, *f<sub>12</sub>*, *f<sub>20</sub>* | [ST, p. 287] | *f<sub>4</sub>*, *4f<sub>8</sub> - f<sub>4</sub><sup>2</sup>*, *2f<sub>12</sub> - 3f<sub>8</sub>f<sub>4</sub> + f<sub>4</sub><sup>3</sup>*, *f<sub>20</sub> - f<sub>12</sub>f<sub>8</sub>*  |
|  G31    | *f<sub>8</sub>*, *f<sub>12</sub>*, *f<sub>20</sub>*, *f<sub>24</sub>* | [M1887, p. 505] | *f<sub>8</sub>*, *f<sub>12</sub>*, *f<sub>20</sub> - f<sub>8</sub>f<sub>12</sub>*, *f<sub>24</sub> - f<sub>12</sub><sup>2</sup>* |
|  G32    | *f<sub>12</sub>*, *f<sub>18</sub>*, *f<sub>24</sub>*, *f<sub>30</sub>* | [M1889, p. 337] | *f<sub>12</sub>*, *f<sub>18</sub>*, *11f<sub>24</sub> - 12f<sub>12</sub><sup>2</sup>*, *5f<sub>30</sub> - 8f<sub>12</sub>f<sub>18</sub>* |
|  G33    | *f<sub>4</sub>*, *f<sub>6</sub>*, *f<sub>10</sub>*, *f<sub>12</sub>*, *f<sub>18</sub>* | [B, pp. 208-209], [O] | *f<sub>4</sub>*, *f<sub>6</sub>*, *f<sub>10</sub>*, *f<sub>12</sub>*, *f<sub>18</sub>* |

### G24
The fundamental invariants 
*f<sub>4</sub>*, *f<sub>6</sub>*, *f<sub>14</sub>*
are written in [BM, p. 264], [MBD, p. 254] and [S, p. 100].
On the one hand,
the generating reflections 
*s<sub>1</sub>*, *s<sub>2</sub>*, *s<sub>3</sub>*
of G24 are given in [S, p. 98].
On the other hand,
GAP3 gives the generating reflections
*m<sub>1</sub>*, *m<sub>2</sub>*, *m<sub>3</sub>*
by 

```
W := ComplexReflectionGroup(24);
m1 := W.matgens[1];
m2 := W.matgens[2];
m3 := W.matgens[3];
```

We can find that
the groups generated by these generators are isomorphic
by the correspondence 
*s<sub>1</sub>* to *m<sub>3</sub>*,
*s<sub>2</sub>* to *m<sub>2</sub>* and
*s<sub>3</sub>* to *m<sub>1</sub>*.
Therefore, the fundamental invariants of [MBD] and [S] corresponds
to the output of GAP3
by a suitable linear change of variables.
But the transformation matrix is very complicated 
(requires the seventh root of unity).

### G27
The fundamental invariants 
*f<sub>6</sub>*, *f<sub>12</sub>*, *f<sub>30</sub>*
are written in [BM, p. 265] and [MBD, p. 254]
in different forms from each other.

In the definition of [BM],
if we change the variables by
*x* to *-x<sub>1</sub>-x<sub>2</sub>*,
*y* to *x<sub>1</sub>-x<sub>2</sub>* and
*z* to *x<sub>3</sub>*,
then they coincide with the output of GAP3
up to scaling.

## References

[B] Heinrich Burkhardt.
Untersuchungen aus dem Gebiete der hyperelliptischen Modulfunctionen.
Math. Ann., 38(2):161–224, 1891.

[BM] D. Bessis and J. Michel.
Explicit presentations for exceptional braid groups.
Experiment. Math., 13(3): 257-266, 2004.

[LNM] T. Harima, T. Maeno, H. Morita, Y. Numata, A. Wachi, J. Watanabe.
The Lefschetz Properties.
Lecture Notes in Mathematics 2080 (2013), Springer-Verlag.

<!-- G29 -->
[M1887] Heinrich Maschke.
Ueber die quaternare, endliche, lineare Substitutionsgruppe der Borchardt’schen Moduln. 
Math. Ann., 30(4):496–515, 1887.

<!-- G32 -->
[M1889] Heinrich Maschke.
Aufstellung des vollen Formensystems einer quaternaren Gruppe von
51840 linearen Substitutionen. 
Math. Ann., 33(3):317–344, 1889.

[MBD] G. A. Miller, H. F. Blichfeldt, and L. E. Dickson. 
Theory and applications of finite groups. 
Dover Publications Inc., New York, 1961.

[O] P. Orlik.
Basic Derivations for Unitary Reflection Groups,
with an appendix by Hiroaki Terao and Yoichi Enta.
Contemp. Math 90, 211–228, 1989.

[OT] P. Orlik and H. Terao.
Arrangements of Hyperplanes.
Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften 300,
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1992.

[S] T. A. Springer. Invariant theory.
Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 585. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977.

[ST] G. C. Shephard and J. A. Todd.
Finite unitary reflection groups. 
Canadian J. Math., 6:274–304, 1954.
